It is interesting that Peter gives counsel about cultivating humility.
Let's turn the clock back and learn why the quality of humility was
indelibly etched in the mind and heart of Peter.
Let's open our Bibles to Luke chapter 22.
In Luke chapter 22, we'll find Jesus getting ready for that final pass
over in 33 CE and Luke 22, starting in verse 8,
it is Thursday afternoon, nice in 13, what happens, verse 8.
Jesus sent Peter, there he is, and John saying,
go and get the pass over ready for us to eat.
Get it ready, Peter, John 9.
They said to him, where do you want us to get it ready?
They understood the instructions, get it ready.
Jesus said, going to Jerusalem, you'll find the man
with the earthenware jar, verse 12.
And that man will show you a large furnished upper room,
get it ready there, verse 13.
So they left and founded just as he had told them
and they prepared for the pass over.
Get it ready, prepare the pass over.
What would that include?
Bread, wine, oil for the lamps,
lamb, towel, basin, water, basin and water.
They knew how important washing feet were.
They witnessed when Jesus approved Simon the Pharisee
with a statement, Simon, you gave me no water for my feet.
Simon, you gave me no water.
You missed the mark on this one.
So as they stared at that basin and water,
as they prepared and got the room ready,
did they look at each other and wonder,
who's going to wash the feet?
Who's going to do it?
They had a golden opportunity to apply all the things
that Jesus had been teaching them for three and a half years
on humility.
This was the time, three and a half years.
Conduct yourself as a lesser one.
Don't lord it over others.
You want to serve others and not be served.
This was it.
This was the time.
They could have showed Jesus that they got the point.
They got it.
They had time to think about it, time to pray about it.
It was Thursday afternoon.
But now we progress and let's see what happens.
Let's now progress to the evening and now it's nice and 14.
Let's pick up the account in John chapter 13.
They got the room ready.
They followed the instructions.
And now let's go to John 13.
And get John's vantage point from this.
He was there.
He was with Peter getting it ready.
So now it's 98 CE and John is writing this information.
He had time to reflect and to think about this for years.
And now look what he says in verse three.
So Jesus.
Knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands
and that he came from God and was going to God.
Knowing these things.
He understood that.
He sat back and said Jesus knew who he was.
He knew all things.
He had the full understanding of his dignity.
He knew that he had been entrusted with all things.
He knew.
He knew he was the second greatest personage in the universe.
He knew he was the first born of all creation.
He knew he had shared with his father in creating all things.
He had knowledge of all this knowing all these things.
John sits back.
He writes this.
And then knowing this verse four.
The contrast.
He got up from the evening meal and laid aside his outer garments,
taking a towel, wraps it around his waist.
After that, he puts the water into the basin,
starts to wash the feet of the disciples
and dry them off with the towel that was wrapped around him,
knowing who he was.
John said he did this.
But not only does John reflect on who Jesus was, no.
He reflects on why Jesus did it.
Why did he do it?
That's what John was interested in.
And we get that answer back in verse one.
Where John says why?
Because he loved his own that were in the world.
He loved them to the end.
John said he loved them to the end.
What does that mean?
He wanted to instill in them qualities that would help them conquer the world.
Qualities that would strengthen the Christian congregation.
Qualities such as unselfish love and humility.
He loved them to the end.
He never gave up on them.
He had no weaknesses, but he did not give up.
Now for Peter some 30 years later,
he's thinking about humility.
John some 60 years later after the lesson Jesus taught about humility,
it's echoing loud and clear in his mind and heart.
However, the fact remains that neither of them had the humility at the time
to apply what Jesus had been teaching them for three and a half years.
Now after John finished his writing,
he sits back, he was under inspiration, he finished that writing,
did he sit back, reread what he just wrote, perhaps he said to himself,
I wish I could have written.
After Jesus washed the feet of one or two of his disciples,
I got up and washed the feet of the rest of my brothers.
I took that towel and I imitated the Christ.
Or Peter and I got up, but the point is they didn't.
What can we learn?
Don't allow valuable lessons that Jesus teaches us to echo in our minds
and hearts only after we miss the opportunity to apply them.
So in a practical setting for us serving here at Bethel,
although I know I have the seniority, I have full knowledge of my seniority
while I get up and fight the attitude of entitlement.
I know I have authority and trusted to me as the overseer,
I am the overseer, I know that, I have full knowledge of that.
Fine, will I get up and roll my sleeves back into the grunt work
or do I just find pleasure in giving orders?
I know, I have a wonderful privilege of service, I know that.
Others know it too, fine, but will I get up to train others?
Brother Jackson reminded us of this at the last Gilead graduation
when he said, treasure your privileges but don't hoard them.
That means we have to get up, it takes humility to train others to take our place.
As a brother or a sister, I know I have more experience than the other person in my job.
I know I have the experience, I know that, I have more experience than my workmate.
Fine, but will I get up in all humility and share information that I have
with others to make their job easier or will I hold knowledge I have hostage?
If we get up in all humility and do these things, then we can say,
Jesus Humble Act as recorded here in John 13 has made a lasting and indelible impression
not only on Peter and John, but on me.